---
layout: post
title: Shebang (#!)
categories:
- OS
---

If you are new to scripting or OS, and ever wondered the first line in most UNIX or UNIX-like OS script represents. This is referred to as shebang or bang `#!` and it starts with a number symbol (#) with an exclamation mark (!) and then followed by Interpreter.

```
#! <absolute path to Interpreter>
```

Bash script example:

script.sh
```bash
#!/bin/bash

echo "This script is executed by Bash Interpreter"
```

```bash
$ ./script.sh
$ This script is executed by Bash Interpreter
```

Python script example:

script.py
```python
#!/usr/bin/python

print("This script is executed by Python Interpreter")
```

```bash
$ ./script.py
$ This script is executed by Python Interpreter
```

`#!` guides the OS to the find the language interpreter and run the following code in the script with that language interpreter. Although, it could be the case that the specified path to language Interpreter might not in the same across all the OS environments, which could make this script non-executable in such cases.

If this first line containing `#!` is missing, then also the script will execute if you run it using the appropriate language Interpreter. For example the following script can be execute using python without specifying `#!/usr/bin/python` in the first line.

sample.py
```python
print("This script is executed without specifying shebang.")
```

```bash
$ python sample.py
$ This script is executed without specifying shebang.
```

## Make script portable
To make sure that your script run across all UNIX or UNIX-like OS environment, we can specify the path to env utility executable and then followed by the language Interpreter. The path to env utility is `/usr/bin/env` .

Using env utility will take away the hassle of specifying the correct path to the language Interpreter instead of specifying the actual path to the Interpreter, which can vary on different UNIX or UNIX-like OS environments. The env utility attempts to find the specified  Interpreter in the path variable ($PATH).

```
#!/usr/bin/env <language Interpreter>
```

Bash script example using env utility:

withenv.sh
```bash
#!/usr/bin/env bash

echo "This script is executed by Bash Interpreter using env utility"
```

```bash
$ ./withenv.sh
$ This script is executed by Bash Interpreter using env utility
```

Python script example using env utility:

withenv.py
```python
#!/usr/bin/env python

print("This script is executed by Python Interpreter using env utility")
```

```bash
$ ./withenv.py
$ This script is executed by Python Interpreter using env utility
```

## Quick tips
To find the absolute path to your language Interpreter, one can use the following utilities.
* type <Interpreter>
* command -V <Interpreter>
* which <Interpreter>
  
For `type` and `command -V` the output will be

```
bash is /bin/bash
```

For  `which` the output will be

```
/bin/bash
```
